Xuanwu District () is one of 11 districts of Nanjing, the capital of Jiangsu province, China. Xuanwu District is an urban centre located in the north- eastern part of Nanjing. It is the site of the Nanjing Municipal Government. ==Administrative subdivisions== Xuanwu has administrative jurisdiction over the following 7 subdistricts: Name Chinese (S) Hanyu Pinyin Population (2010) Area (km2) Meiyuanxincun Subdistrict Méiyuán Xīncūn Jiēdào 107,395 6.35 Xinjiekou Subdistrict Xīnjiēkǒu Jiēdào 93,906 2.6 Xuanwumen Subdistrict Xuánwǔmén Jiēdào 41,993 6 Suojincun Subdistrict Suǒjīncūn Jiēdào 76,063 6 Hongshan Subdistrict Hóngshān Jiēdào 88,217 6.9 Xiaolingwei Subdistrict Xiàolíngwèi Jiēdào 112,654 30 Xuanwuhu Subdistrict Xuánwǔhú Jiēdào 69,739 11.6 * Defunct - Houzaimen Subdistrict () merged into Meiyuan Xincun in 2012 ==Economy== The main industries in the district are: leisure and tourism, information technology, retail, and services. Its economy is primarily based upon the delivery of services. Industry zones include the Changjiang Road Cultural Area, Xinjiekou Central Economic Area, and Xuzhuang Software Industry Base. The district has attracted multi-national corporations, such as 3M, American Express, Siemens, Hyundai, Samsung, NYK Line, and Cathay Life Insurance.Nanjing Xuanwu District Investment Environment Study. KPMG. February 2009. p. 9, 11. Retrieved May 14, 2014. ==Education== There are more than 40 colleges, universities, and research institutes in the district, including Southeast University, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing Forestry University, and Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences. There are about 35 academics from the Chinese Academy of Engineering and Chinese Academy of Sciences there, which represent about 50% of the academics from those academies in Jiangsu Province.Nanjing Xuanwu District Investment Environment Study. KPMG. February 2009. p. 10. Retrieved May 14, 2014. Xuanwu is also home to the People's Liberation Army Navy of China Command College, which trains naval officers, and is located near the Nanjing Museum.https://unitracker.aspi.org.au/universities/naval-command- college/ ==Transportation== Transportation within the district includes Line 1 and Line 2 of the Nanjing Metro, which has stations within the district. Other sources of transportation that are 20 or more minutes from the district are the Nanjing Railway Station, Shanghai-Nanjing Railway, and Nanjing Lukou Airport. ==Attractions== The scenic Xuanwu District is also known for its tourists attractions like the Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum, Xuanwu Lake, and the Hongwu Emperor's Mausoleum, which is listed as one of the Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties that are listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The district has more than 58 percent green cover. Adjacent to Xuanwu Lake is the Nanjing International Exhibition Center. ==References== Category:County- level divisions of Jiangsu Category:Districts of Nanjing