X Factor is the Albanian television reality music competition, based on the original British series, and an addition to The X Factor franchise, to find new singing talent. The show began airing on 8 January 2012 and was broadcast by TV Klan. The judging panel consisted of Pandi Laço, Alban Skënderaj, Juliana Pasha, Vesa Luma, Altuna Sejdiu, Soni Malaj, Miriam Cani and Bleona Qereti. The show is hosted by Alketa Vejsiu. She applied to acquire the rights of the show along with Top Channel and TV Klan. Syco TV gave the rights to her, then she sold parts of the rights to TV Klan. After losing the rights of The X Factor, Top Channel acquired the rights of the talent show, The Voice.(15 August 2011).Alketa sjell “X Factor” në Shqipëri (Alketa brings "X Factor" to Albania Retrieved 5 December 2011. The show run for 4 seasons, with the last episode airing on 1 June 2015, and then TV Klan announced that there were no plans to air another series of the programme. On 6 June 2022, Alketa Vejsiu announced that after 7 years, the show would return, with his fifth season on 2023 on TV Klan. There have been four winners: Sheila Haxhiraj, Arilena Ara, Ergi Dini and Edea Demaliaj . ==Overview== It was announced that there would be four categories on the show, Males 15 to 23, Females 15 to 23, over 23s and The Groups. Also it was announced that there would be five stages of the competition. The first stage is known as the "Producers audition", the producers of the show choose which of the contestants will have the right to audition in front of the judges. Next the contestants audition in front of the judges where they sing at least one song with instrumentals or A Capella. The third stage of the competition is Bootcamp, where from thousands of contestants only 150 are left. The fourth stage includes the "Judge's houses" or known in Albania as "Vilat e Jurive", where only 32 contestants,8 per category would fight for their place in the live shows. And the last stage of the competition would be the Live shows, where four contestants per category will make it.(20 September 2011). Alketa, në kërkim të talenteve për “X Factor” (Alketa in search of talents for The X Factor) Retrieved 5 December 2011. In the first live show the public couldn't vote or make a decision. In the second live show and on, only the public had the right to vote and decide which contestants from all categories would end up in the bottom two. The two contestants with the lowest number of votes would end up in the bottom two, then they sing again for survival, the four judges would decide which contestant they want to eliminate. If one of the judges has his or her contestant on the bottom two, he or she usually decides to eliminate the other contestant in the bottom two, so the real decision is in the hands of the two or (if one judge has two of its contestants in the bottom two) three judges that don't have their own contestants in the bottom two. The show goes this way on the live shows every week one or two contestants are voted off, until the grand finale on June 10 when the winner is announced. The auditions were held in different cities across Albania and Kosovo, the producers auditions included many cities but the auditions in front of the judges were held only in a few. The cities that auditions were held with the judges are Tirana, Vlora, Elbasan, Shkoder and the Kosovan capital Pristina. The first episode aired half of Tirana's auditions on January 8. Vesa Luma wasn't the judge on all of the city auditions, she was chosen as the fourth judge only after all of the city auditions ended. She judged on the Shkodra's audition also. It was reported that more than 7000 people auditioned for the show, which broke a record for the biggest number of auditions in any talent show across Albania, Kosovo and the Balkans. On the official Facebook page of the X Factor, it was announced that the show would be first aired on January 8, 2012. It was reported that the winner of the show would be signed to the famous label Syco Music, which has signed the likes of Leona Lewis, One Direction, Susan Boyle, Little Mix, Cher Lloyd, Alexandra Burke, Westlife etc. The winner of the first season of X factor Albania was Sheila Haxhiraj. ==Judges and hosts== Cast Seasons 1 2 3 4 Host Alketa Vejsiu colspan="4" Judging panelists Alban Skënderaj colspan="4" Pandi Laço colspan="4" Juliana Pasha colspan="3" Vesa Luma colspan="3" Altuna Sejdiu colspan="2" Soni Malaj colspan="2" Bleona Qereti colspan="3" Miriam Cani colspan="3" ==Series summary== Contestant in "Pandi Laço" Contestant in "Juliana Pasha" Contestant in "Alban Skënderaj" Contestant in "Vesa Luma" Contestant in "Altuna Sejdiu" Contestant in "Soni Malaj" Contestant in "Miriam Cani" Contestant in "Bleona Qereti" Season Winner Third place Winning mentor Presenter Main judges (Seat order) 1 8 January 2012 10 June 2012 Sheila Haxhiraj Girls Kristo Thano Boys Xhesika Polo Girls Juliana Pasha Alketa Vejsiu Pandi Laço Vesa Luma Juliana Pasha Alban Skënderaj 2 28 October 2012 31 March 2013 Arilena Ara Girls Aldo Bardhi Boys Natyral Groups Altuna Sejdiu Altuna Sejdiu Soni Malaj 3 15 September 2013 23 February 2014 Ergi Dini Boys Senad Rrahmani Over 23s Sarah Memmola Over 23s 4 5 January 2015 1 June 2015 Edea Demaliaj Girls Genti Deda Boys Dilan Reka Boys Miriam Cani Miriam Cani Bleona Qereti ==Judges' categories and their contestants== In each season, each judge is allocated a category to mentor and chooses four acts to progress to the live shows. This table shows, for each season, which category each judge was allocated and which acts he or she put through to the live shows. Key: : – Winning judge/category. Winners are in bold, eliminated contestants in small font. Season Pandi Laço Vesa Luma Juliana Pasha Alban Skënderaj One Groups Classic Boys X Group Focus Red Roses Over 23s Lirije Rashiti Besa Breca Gerald Zyfi Matilda Shushari Girls Sheila Haxhiraj Xhesika Polo Festina Mejzini Savjana Vjerdha Boys Kristo Thano Anxhelo Miho Amarildo Shahinaj Arianit Bellopoja Two Pandi Laço Altuna Sejdiu Soni Malaj Alban Skënderaj No Limit Kanita Suma Egzona Ademi Suela Malasi Ina Torba Rezart Saliasi Girls Arilena Ara Antonela Çekixhi Elisa Salla Xhina Kelmendi Shkelqesa Sadiku Boys Aldo Bardhi Sardi Strugaj Petro Xhori Herri Beluli Groups Natyral KSAL Soul Sisters Foxy Ladies Three Girls Enxhi Nasufi Laura Kërliu Arissa Rexho Kristina Leka Boys Ergi Dini Leotrim Zejnullahu Amadeo Gjura Ademir Fresku Groups Exception Free Spirit Nimfat Dream Girls Over 23s Senad Rrahmani Sarah Memmola Mia Morina Fatmir Durmishi Four Pandi Laço Miriam Cani Bleona Qereti Alban Skënderaj Four Groups Brunetts X Roads Mama Pop Double F Girls Edea Demaliaj Floriana Rexhepi Lediana Matoshi Mirela Boka Boys Genti Deda Dilan Reka Matteo Brento Igli Zarka Gerald Celibashi Over 23s Manuel Moscati Alice Ylenia Iorio Adela Curra == References == Category:Television series by Fremantle (company) Category:2012 Albanian television series debuts Category:2015 Albanian television series endings Category:2010s Albanian television series Category:Albanian reality television series Category:Non-British television series based on British television series Category:Television shows filmed in Albania Category:Television shows set in Albania Category:Televizioni Klan original programming