Xu Dongdong (; born 16 February 1990) is a Chinese actress, singer and model. Xu first rose to prominence in 2016 for playing Shen Jiawen, a drug trafficker, in the television series Yu Zui, which attracted more than 100 million views on iQiyi within days of its premiere, making it one of the most popular TV series tailored for the online platform. ==Early life and education== Xu was born in Harbin, Heilongjiang on February 16, 1990. At the age of 7, she moved to Beijing. She graduated from the People's Liberation Army Academy of Art. ==Career== Xu had her first experience in front of the camera in 2007, and she was chosen to act as a support actor in Tears in the Red City, a television series starring Cao Lan and Li Dongbei. And she subsequently appearing on Oriental King Lion. Xu had a minor role as Yue Rong in Chen Xiang (2010), which starred Li Yapeng, Tommy Tam, Wu Mian, and Xu Huanshan. Xu's first film role was a policewoman uncredited appearance in the romance film Eternal Moment (2011). It stars Li Yapeng, Xu Jinglei, Wang Xuebing, and Je Jie. The film grossed ¥200 million on a budget of only ¥10 million. In 2012, Xu appeared in television series, such as Master Lin in Seoul, The Sent-down Youth and Angry Photographer. She was cast in the gangster television series Skynet 2012. Other cast members are Du Zhiguo, Du Chun, Dai Jiaoqian, and Wu Ma. She participated in Jin Tailang's Happy Life, a romance television series starring Song Dandan, Li Xiaolu and Wang Lei. Xu appeared as Na Na, a beautiful girl who appeared in the bar, in the thriller film Flash Play (2013). It stars Alex Fong, Zhang Xinyu, Chrissie Chau, Lee Wei, and Timmy Hung. She starred with Purba Rgyal in Letter of Tour. That same year, she starred in the romantic comedy television series Gorgeous Workers, alongside Hans Zhang, Choo Ja-hyun, Ken Chu, and Wu Peirou. In 2014, Xu played the lead role in the suspense horror thriller mystery film Closed Doors Village. She had a cameo appearance in Lord of Shanghai, an action film starring Hu Jun, Yu Nan, Rhydian Vaughan, and Qin Hao. That same year, she played the drillmaster Meng Xue, the lead role in The First Paratrooper Team, costarring Purba Rgyal and Shao Bing. Xu had a minor role as Jenni in Love Contractually (2015), which starred Sammi Cheng and Joseph Chang. In 2016, Xu had key supporting role in the Yu Zui, created by iQiyi. She was praised for her role. After Yu Zui was broadcast, it enjoyed the highest ratings in China and she quickly rose to prominence. She made a guest appearance on Wong Jing's Mission Milano, a Chinese-Hong Kong action adventure comedy film starring Andy Lau, Huang Xiaoming, Shen Teng, Wong Cho-lam, Michelle Hu and Ouyang Nana. She also appeared in Wong Jing and Andrew Lau's From Vegas to Macau III, an action film starring Chow Yun-fat, Andy Lau, Nick Cheung and Li Yuchun. She played Shi Ying in the historical romance drama film Chinese Wine, opposite Van Fan and Huang Yi. Xu appeared in Chasing the Dragon, an action crime drama film directed by Wong Jing and Jason Kwan. The film stars Andy Lau reprising his role as Lee Rock from the film series of the same name, Donnie Yen as Crippled Ho, based on real life gangster Ng Sik-ho. ==Filmography== ===Film=== Year English title Chinese title Role Notes 2011 Eternal Moment Policewoman 2013 Flash Play Na Na The Password of Dream Female lead Letter of Tour Ou Shiman 2014 Closed Doors Village Nina 70 80 90 Deng Jianing Lord of Shanghai Lu Xianglan 2015 Love Contractually Jenni 2016 A Test of Love Adventure Sister S Mission Milano Xue Ji (Snow) From Vegas to Macau III Female God of Gamblers Little Lucky Bao Hong Chinese Wine Shi Ying 2017 Zuo Lan Chasing the Dragon Rose (A Hua) 2019 A Test of Love Adventure 2019 Mr. Loser 2019 The Sexy Guys 2019 Invisible Tattoo 2019 The Sword Legend ===TV series=== Year English title Chinese title Role Notes 2007 Oriental King Lion Wu Ming Tears in the Red City 2010 Chen Xiang Yue Rong 2012 Master Lin in Seoul Cui Chun'ai The Sent-down Youth Lin Li Jin Tailang's Happy Life Xiao Yu Ordinary Time Xu Danxia Skynet 2012 Zhu Xiao Angry Photographer Lin Yaohua 2013 Gorgeous Workers Qin Jialing Rapture and Found Chu Yue 2014 The Happy Life of Housewife Meng Nan The First Paratrooper Team Meng Xue 2016 Yu Zui Shen Jiawen 2018 Guardian Angel 2018 Web Drama Cici Baby ===MV=== Year English title Chinese title Singer Notes 2008 Half of Love Li Jian Promotional Copy Eason Chan Xu Dongdong at hkmdb.com Xu Dongdong at chinesemov.com ==Music== Year English title Chinese title Notes 2013 Love You So Much ==References== ==External links== * Category:1990 births Category:People from Harbin Category:People's Liberation Army Academy of Art alumni Category:Living people Category:21st-century Chinese actresses Category:Chinese television actresses Category:Chinese film actresses Category:Actresses from Heilongjiang Category:21st-century Chinese women singers