Xanthoparmelia perezdepazii is a species of saxicolous (rock-dwelling), foliose lichen in the family Parmeliaceae. It is found in the Canary Islands. ==Taxonomy== The lichen was formally described as a new species in 2007 by Israel Pérez-Vargas, Consuelo Hernández-Padron, and John Alan Elix. The type specimen was collected by the first two authors from Llano de la Santidad in Teide National Park (Tenerife) at an altitude of , where it was found growing on basaltic rocks. The species epithet honours Professor , "in recognition of his many contributions to Canarian lichenology". ==Description== The lichen has a yellow-green thallus measuring wide; the lobes comprising the thallus are wide. Soredia are absent, but there is a dense covering of isidia on the thallus surface; these structures are initially spherical, later becoming cylindrical, and measuring up to 1 mm high. The medulla is white, while the lower thallus surface is mid- to dark-brown, but not blackened (as is typical with many other Xanthoparmelia species). Rhizines are simples (i.e., unbranched), more or less the same colour as the undersurface, and measure up to 1 mm long. Neither apothecia nor pycnidia were present in the type collection. The lichen products present in X. perezdepazii are usnic acid, constipatic acid, and protoconstipatic acid. ==Habitat and distribution== Xanthoparmelia perezdepazii is only known to occur in the Canary Islands. Its habitat is the shrub-like community known as "retamar", found at high elevations, and featuring Cytisus supranubius, Pterocephalus lasiospermus, and Pinus canariensis. The lichen tends to be better developed in northeast-facing locations, where typical associating lichens include Lecanora rupicola, Rhizoplaca melanophthalma, Physcia albinea, Xanthoparmelia tinctina, and crustose species from the genera Aspicilia and Caloplaca. ==See also== *List of Xanthoparmelia species ==References== perezdepazii Category:Lichen species Category:Lichens described in 2007 Category:Lichens of Macaronesia Category:Taxa named by John Alan Elix